I get email like this I get messages
like this I get hate mail like this
probably you hear this stuff from your
friends neighbors and relatives oh well
I don't know
Canada's native people Canada's Inuit
they they were all perfectly healthy
back when they were eating a diet of
absolutely nothing but meat and fish and
whale blubber it's just so convincing
and yet it seems that nobody on either
side is ever convinced people invoke
this memory of what the Inuit supposedly
represent and then they continue to eat
hamburgers at McDonald's they continue
to eat factory farmed beef did the Inuit
eat cows did anybody hamburgers like
even if you found this line of reasoning
convincing it would inspire you to
reject a vegan diet to reject a
vegetarian diet to reject the kind of
moderate science based on the war diet
you'd have to adopt a diet incredibly
expensive and difficult to sustain but
wait wait wait let's take a step back
and actually use some empirical and
scientific methods here's the kind of
greatest hits of factual arguments for
the next 15 minutes from a channel you
may not know called plant positive this
guy did a lot of work putting forward a
lot of facts that are quite annoying to
cobble together some good old-fashioned
books it's really a great shame that his
YouTube channel
never did a collaboration with somebody
like Mike the vegan or other health and
science-based YouTube channels guys
YouTube is a place where information
comes to be broadcast but it's also
unfortunately a place where information
comes to die so I'm making this video
partly to promote awareness of this nail
long forgotten
YouTube channel shadow to plant positive
we're lucky to have this old issue of
National Geographic
it has an article about the discovery of
two female mummies around 440 years old
discovered near Point Barrow far inside
the Arctic Circle if there had ever been
a perfect time and place to be naturally
low-carb this was it one mummy had been
in her early 40s the other in her 20s
just as we would expect of people living
in such a hostile frigid place the
remains showed evidence of stress
despite their young ages they showed
evidence of atherosclerosis a type of
hardening of the arteries they also
suffered from osteoporosis or the
degradation of their bones a painful
parasitic infection was apparent as well
all this could be called the inevitable
result of a diet of mostly raw animal
carcasses this is the coronary artery of
an even older female mummy than the two
in the National Geographic issue in this
case from around 400 AD we see
pronounced atherosclerosis this is
natural cardiovascular health the
low-carb way long before refined carbs
what we see here are effectively long
term studies of an animal-based why is
traditions diet and the results are not
pretty we see evidence of heart disease
weak bones and parasitic infections
let's look at these three problems a bit
more closely in Eskimos starting with
their cardiovascular disease early in
the Paleo diet Loren Cordain tells us
the Greenland Eskimos were exemplars of
heart health
referencing the work of bong and Dyer
Berg this is a less than ideal reference
for a man who argues that lower
cholesterol is better bong and Dyer Berg
found that the Greenland Eskimos had
what we would call today borderline high
cholesterol levels to whatever extent
they may have been protected from heart
attacks bon and dire Berg said it was
likely because of the extremely high
levels of omega-3 fatty acids they
consumed they thought the price for this
protection was their higher rate of
stroke which Cordain fails to mention
the myth of low cardiovascular disease
among Eskimos was examined by these
researchers they found heart disease was
not less common in Eskimos than in
whites mortality from stroke was higher
however I'll mentioned here that I will
use the terms Eskimo and Inuit
interchangeably in these videos those
researchers also found a reliable old
testimonial indicating the
cardiovascular disease was actually
quite common for these people this
website did the fact-checking for us I
recommend you visit it and read this
blog post I'll just borrow enough of
their material here to show you that
they certainly did not have low
cholesterol and more importantly they
had horrible life expectancy the
perspective of the author's here is that
higher cholesterol is better so
obviously I don't agree with their take
on this for the Ancel keys detractors
out there it's worth the mention that
this pioneer of heart health was aware
of the Eskimo diet he was also aware of
their tragically short life expectancy
here is more evidence of heart trouble
among the Eskimos between 1956 and 1958
the bodies of Eskimos were autopsy for
this study hardening of the arteries was
observed to be quite common more
recently a large cohort of Eskimos were
studied despite favorable lipid profiles
rates of stroke and cardiovascular
disease were high notice they carried a
high pathogen burden that brings us to
another problem created by their
traditional diet parasitic infections
Eskimos certainly had them here you see
a 1950 record of the prevalence of
intestinal parasites among them this is
inevitable if you are routinely
consuming raw untreated fish and meat
these parasites would have had the
effect of lowering their blood
cholesterol doctors Eden and Cordain
should have clued you in on this don't
you think
circumpolar natives had high infection
rates of one notorious parasite
Toxoplasma the Inuit were the most
afflicted
group in this study with 72% of their
pregnant women infected what about the
osteoporosis observed in those eskimo
mummies this paleo pathologist
attributed that to their high-protein
diet
extreme protein intake is fingered for
blame here as well
bone mineral content and Eskimos was
assessed as deficient in the 1974 study
the Eskimos compared poorly to whites
who presumably were eating a lot more
carbs than the Eskimos were so as their
high protein intake really the best
explanation for their weak bones there
are conflicting studies regarding the
effects of high-protein diets on bone
health however the evidence is more
clear that dietary saturated fat is
highly damaging to bones this has been
demonstrated through animal
experimentation Eskimos are a curious
choice of dietary model for paleo
dieters and CrossFitters it is in the
interest of those in cold climates to
have more insulating body fat
Eskimos were long ago considered
unusually short and overweight they were
not considered to be physically strong
either they were observed to age poorly
as well this is usually not an openly
stated goal for fad diets descriptions
of Eskimos from the 19th century can be
uncomfortable to read these unflattering
descriptions wouldn't be worth reviewing
if Eskimos weren't presented as a model
for us today
traditional Eskimos had other health
problems as well they have been
afflicted by some cancers for example a
century ago reports stated otherwise but
they were later shown to be inaccurate
any observed low occurrence of cancer
soon was understood to be only the
result of infectious diseases which
ended their lives before cancers had a
chance to develop Eskimos actually have
some of the world's highest rates of
certain cancers here is a graph that a
cancer was also identified in the
remains of an extinct paleo Eskimo
perhaps some of that can be explained by
the toxins in their food supply eating
such fatty food so far up the food chain
is bound to convey environmental
contaminants into these people inuit
milk contained up to ten times the level
of
assistant organochlorine compounds as
found in the milk of women in Quebec
these authors say Inuit women have the
highest known body burdens of these
pollutants more evidence that Eskimos of
the old days aren't ideal models for
health comes from this doctors account
from 1935 of his services to them this
is sometimes reference to argue that
they were especially healthy but such a
reading requires ignoring some key
passages in this one children were said
to frequently die after eating meat that
had begun to spoil he said Eskimos also
commonly suffered from appendicitis
Eskimos called this rotten guts higher
rates of appendicitis and other cultures
have been linked to increased meat
eating my final slide for the Eskimos
brings us back to our mummies here you
see that all those omega-3 fatty acids
don't seem to help Eskimos keep plaque
out of their arteries for the Eskimos
just like everyone else saturated fat
causes atherosclerosis here is Loren
Cordain claiming that the Inuit had a
low rate of coronary disease as verified
by autopsy studies remember he thought
there could be a meat-based non
atherogenic diet one reference here to
support his claim is gotten in 1960 this
reference was also put forth by some of
the original Paleo diet promoters Boyd
Eaton and Melvin Conner rather than take
their word for it let's look at the
actual paper as you see Gottman is the
author did Corday not see the passage on
the right Gottman says there was a
40-year old woman with calcified
arteries 40 is way too young for such a
thing dr. Cordain where do you get your
low standards this calcification is what
happens during heart disease donman also
mentioned a 41 year old man who suffered
a stroke due to plaque formation and he
too had diseased arteries 41 isn't old
to me dr. Cordain would Godman have
guessed that his paper would be used one
day to say that these people were
unusually healthy
did Court they not see his statement
that the conclusion of this author is
that cardiovascular disease if an
arteriosclerotic type is not uncommon
among the Eskimos or Indians in Alaska I
am continually astounded by the
misrepresentation of the old research by
these imaginative low-carb errs Godman
remarked that the bodies he autopsy
tended to be quite young only 5% were
over 50 years old most were under 20 you
can imagine how tough life must have
been for them back then another
reference Cordain used to support his
claim of a low rate of heart disease
among the Inuit was B era guard and Dyer
burg which is on the fifth line down
this one also found a high rate of
stroke like Godman these authors
cautioned that their research shouldn't
be over interpreted the validity of
Greenlandic mortality statistics is not
high they said we have yet more weak
data and yet another weak reference can
you believe the low-carb errs think
these studies are worth more than the
China study these authors were quite
clear that they thought the Marine diet
of these Innuit caused a shift in risk
away from heart disease and towards
strokes this study is an especially odd
choice for Cordain because it so
directly contradicts his paper and his
beliefs the authors say clearly that any
impression of a lower rate of ischemic
heart disease among these into it does
not give a correct picture because they
died at such high rates from other
things in other words other things
happen to kill them first before heart
disease could get its chance but that
isn't the best part here you see that
their mortality from heart disease had
actually declined as they left their
paleo lifestyle and lived in towns
eating non paleo foods dr. Cordain is
not a cardiologist and that is probably
why he doesn't think cholesterol scores
in the 300 to 400 range at the high end
are especially high
I can assure you however that that is
high cholesterol mean cholesterol for
all men over 20 was above 200 they
definitely aren't relatively low
compared to vegans Innuit cholesterol
was found to be higher than what was
seen in the United States and remember
the United States was having a major
problem with coronary disease then in
1990 a study was done comparing Native
Greenlanders to Danes to try to account
for the lower reported rates of heart
disease among the Greenlanders using
ultrasonographer they found that they
had almost the same degree of
atherosclerosis as the Danes they stated
that atherosclerosis was probably
generally present among these intimate
to a similar extent as for Caucasians
they did find it plausible that there
might be a factor in their diets which
may have lowered their rate of
infarction you now know this was likely
due to their high fish consumption which
also probably contributed to their
higher rate of stroke all that fish
consumption also explains why their
bodily toxin burdens were high in this
study one of the main predictors of high
bodily contaminant concentrations was
their markers of omega-3 fatty acids
from fish more fish more toxins was the
finding here here a detailed examination
was conducted of several other mummies
these dated from around 1475 thanks to
fortuitous discoveries like this I can
inform you about the preserved bodies of
people who lived in environments as
carbohydrate free as is naturally
possible they were not eating any grains
or beans here you see at the top left
that arterial plaque was found in one
mummy he also had very weak bones a
common theme for these old mummies their
diet seemed to have been very damaging
to their bone health on the right you
can see that a child was also found to
poor bone quality as well as possible
birth defects at the top you can see
that their high-protein diets led to the
development of a kidney stone in one
money again their lives must have been
quite hard
I hear that kidney stones are awful on
the right you can see that this paleo
pathologist was certain he discovered
evidence of a malignant cancer in one
body he said that this form of cancer
was also common in modern times among
circumpolar people's with all that said
I will affirm for the Western price
foundation fans that they had no tooth
decay if that happens to be your highest
health priority poor bone status has
been observed among these people in more
recent times these researchers blamed
their poor bone health on their
high-protein low calcium diets these
researchers thought a comparison with
vegetarians was appropriate as well
remarking that vegetarians seemed to
have better bone health than omnivores
when you put all this together I don't
think the take-home message should be
that these people were or are in any way
lesser than anyone else historic
circumpolar peoples were challenged in
life in ways that very few of us are
today their survival alone is to be
admired my point here is that there is
no reason to look to them as models of
good health for us
[Music]